# 🥜 Pnut: A Self-Compiling C Transpiler Targeting Human-Readable POSIX Shell

Pnut compiles a reasonably large subset of C99 to human-readable POSIX shell
scripts. It can be used to generate portable shell scripts without having to
write shell.

Its main uses are:

- As a transpiler to write portable shell scripts in C.
- As a way to bootstrap a compiler written in C with an executable version that
  is still human readable (See [reproducible builds](#reproducible-builds)).

Main features:

- No new language to learn -- C code in, shell code out.
- The human-readable shell script is easy to read and understand.
- A runtime library including file I/O and dynamic memory allocations.
- A preprocessor (`#include`, `#ifdef`, `#if`, `#define MACRO ...`, `#define MACRO_F(x) ...`).
- Integrates easily with [existing shell scripts](#mixing-c-and-shell-code).

The [examples](examples/compiled) directory contains many examples.
We invite you take a look!

Other than being able to compile itself, Pnut can also compile the [Ribbit
Virtual Machine](https://github.com/udem-dlteam/ribbit) which can run a R4RS
Scheme Read-eval-print loop directly in shell. See
[repl.sh](examples/compiled/repl.sh) for the generated shell script.

## Install

Pnut can be distributed as the `pnut-sh.sh` shell script, or compiled to
executable code using a C compiler.

To install pnut:

```shell
> git clone https://github.com/udem-dlteam/pnut.git
> cd pnut
> sudo make install DESTDIR=/usr/local
```

This installs both `pnut-sh.sh` and `pnut` to `/usr/local/bin/`.

Pnut also support a native code backend that generates executable code (x86
Linux and MacOS for now), which we call `pnut-exe`. To install `pnut-exe` and
its shell version `pnut-exe.sh`:

```shell
> sudo make install-pnut-exe DESTDIR=/usr/local
```

### Compilation Options

Compilation options can be used to change the generated shell script:

- `SH_ANNOTATE=1` includes the original C code in the generated shell
  script.
- `SH_COMPACT_RT=1` reduces the size of the runtime library at the
  cost of reduced I/O performance.
- `SH_FAST=1` make pnut-sh generate faster shell code by using a faster calling
  convention.
- `MINIMAL=1` support only the minimal set of C features required to bootstrap
  pnut, reducing the size of `pnut-sh.sh` and `pnut-exe.sh`.

They can be set using `make install SH_ANNOTATE=1 ...`.

## How to Use

The `pnut` compiler takes a C file path as input, and outputs to stdout the
POSIX shell code.

Here's an example of how to compile a C file using Pnut:

```shell
> pnut-sh.sh examples/fib.c > fib.sh # Compile fib.c to a shell script
> chmod +x fib.sh                    # Make the shell script executable
> ./fib.sh                           # Run the shell script
```

## C Language Support

Unfortunately, certains C constructs don't map nicely to POSIX shell which means:

- No support for floating point numbers and unsigned integers.
- `goto` and `switch` fallthrough are not supported.
- The address of (`&`) operator on local variables is not supported.
- Arrays and structures cannot be stack-allocated or passed by value.
- Function pointers and indirect calls.
- Arrays of aggregate types (structures or arrays) are not supported.

### Mixing C and Shell Code

The `#include "file.sh"` directive can be used to include shell code in
the generated shell script. This makes it possible to call system utilities from
C code, or to use shell scripts generated by Pnut as a library. See
[select-file.c](examples/select-file.c) and [posix-utils.sh](examples/posix-utils.sh)
for how to use this feature.

## Which shell to use

Because Pnut generates purely POSIX shell code, the generated shell scripts can
run on any POSIX compliant shell. However, certain shells are faster than
others. For faster executions, we recommend the use of `ksh`, `dash` or `bash`.
`zsh` is also supported but tends to be slower on large programs.

## Reproducible Builds

Because Pnut can be distributed as a human-readable shell script (`pnut-sh.sh`),
it can serve as the basis for a reproducible build system. Along with a POSIX
compliant shell, `pnut-sh.sh` is sufficient to bootstrap `pnut-exe`, which can
then be used to bootstrap [TCC](https://bellard.org/tcc/). Because TCC can be
used to compile GCC, this makes it possible to bootstrap a fully featured
build toolchain from only human-readable source files and a POSIX shell.

Because `pnut-sh.sh` is not directly capable of compiling TCC, the `pnut-exe`
compiler is used as an intermediate step. `pnut-exe` is implemented in the C
subset supported by `pnut-sh`, while supporting a large enough subset of C99 to
compile TCC. Because `pnut-exe` doesn't require much C support, it is also
compatible with other minimal compilers, such as
[M2-Planet](https://github.com/oriansj/M2-Planet), allowing its use in a variety
of bootstrapping scenarios.

To bootstrap `tcc` from `pnut-sh.sh`, the following steps are taken:

1. Compile `pnut-exe.c` to `pnut-exe.sh` using `pnut-sh.sh`. `pnut-exe.sh` is a shell script that turns C code into machine code.
2. Compile `pnut-exe.c` to `pnut-exe` using `pnut-exe.sh`. This version of `pnut-exe` is an executable and is much faster.
3. Compile the `kit/bintools.c` using `pnut-exe` to produce the required binary utilities.
4. Compile TCC using `pnut-exe`, then recompile it with TCC (a few times) to get the final `tcc` executable.

The `./kit/setup-rootfs.sh` script can be used to create an isolated environment
where the first 3 steps can be performed:

```shell
# Make jammed.sh archive (self-extracting shell script)
> make kit/jammed.sh
# Setup isolated root filesystem in "island" directory
> ./kit/setup-rootfs.sh --dir "island" --path-to-jammed kit/jammed.sh --include-utils
```

To enter the isolated environment and run the bootstrap process, use:

```shell
# Enter the chroot environment
> sudo chroot island /bin/bash
# List files in the chroot
bash-5.3$ . ls.sh
# Extract files to initiate bootstrap
bash-5.3$ . jammed.sh
# Run the bootstrap process from the extracted files
bash-5.3$ . bootstrap.sh
```

After the `bootstrap.sh` script finishes, the `pnut-exe` executable will be
installed in `/usr/bin/`, along with the following utilities: `chmod`, `cp`,
`mkdir`, `sha256sum`, `simple-patch`, `ungz`. These tools can then be used to
compile TCC from source, like how it is done in
[live-bootstrap](https://github.com/fosslinux/live-bootstrap/). Work to extend
the bootstrap script to include TCC and GCC is ongoing.

### Annotated Shell Scripts

`pnut-sh` can include C code annotations in the generated shell script (with the
`SH_ANNOTATE=1` makefile option) to make them self-contained and easier to
audit. These annotations correspond to the original C source code, with the
lines inside inactive `#if`/`#ifdef` blocks removed, with each top-level shell
declaration prefixed by a comment containing the corresponding C
code.

This feature is especially interesting when applied to `pnut-sh.sh`, as it turns
it into some sort of "quine-like" program: from the annotated shell script, the
original C source code can be extracted and recompiled to obtain the original
`pnut-sh.sh` shell script, closing the loop and confirming that the generated
shell script matches the embedded C code. This can be done with the following
commands:

```shell
# Generate pnut-sh.sh with annotations
> make pnut-sh.sh SH_ANNOTATE=1
# Extract C code
> /bin/sh build/pnut-sh.sh -C build/pnut-sh.sh > build/pnut-sh.c
# Recompile C code
> /bin/sh build/pnut-sh.sh build/pnut-sh.c > build/pnut-sh-from-annotations.sh
# Verify both shell scripts match
> diff build/pnut-sh.sh build/pnut-sh-from-annotations.sh
```

A similar process can be done with `pnut-exe.sh`, this time producing an
executable version of `pnut-exe`:

```shell
# Generate pnut-exe.sh with annotations
> make pnut-exe.sh SH_ANNOTATE=1
# Extract C code
> /bin/sh build/pnut-exe.sh -C build/pnut-exe.sh > build/pnut-exe.c
# Recompile C
> /bin/sh build/pnut-exe.sh build/pnut-exe.c > build/pnut-exe-from-annotations
# Let's compare with the "regular" bootstrapped version
> make pnut-exe-bootstrapped
# Verify both executables match
> diff build/pnut-exe-from-annotations build/pnut-exe-bootstrapped
```

## Documentation

You can find my slides from my presentation at the Software Language Engineering
(SLE24) conference and the paper the presentation is based in the `doc/`
directory.

## Contributing

Pnut is a research project and contributions are welcome. Please open an issue
to report any bugs or to discuss new features.

To make sure your changes are good, a good practice is to try to compile pnut
with itself. This can be done with:

1. `make bootstrap-pnut-sh BOOTSTRAP_SHELL=/bin/sh`: to bootstrap `pnut-sh.sh` with `pnut-sh`
2. `make bootstrap-pnut-exe-script BOOTSTRAP_SHELL=/bin/sh`: to bootstrap `pnut-exe.sh` with `pnut-sh`
3. `make bootstrap-pnut-exe-no-shell`: to bootstrap `pnut-exe` with `pnut-exe`

See `make bootstrap-help` for more details.
